.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Christopher Hall
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd 2020-04-25
.Dt emu803
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm emu803
.Nd Elliott 803 emulator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl V
.Ar command_file
.Op Ar
.Nm
.Op Fl i
.Op Fl e Ar command_file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is an emulator for the Elliott 803 Computer. It emulates all arithmetic
and logic operations and some of the peripherals.
.Pp
A single script may be specified using the
.Fl e
option.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl V
Display the program version on stdout and exit.
.It Fl i
Enter interactive mode after all commands have been processed, this is
the default if no other arguments are specified.
.It Fl e Ar command_file
Append the commands commands found in the file
.Ar command_file
to the list of commands to be executed at startup.
The commands must each be listed on a separate line.
.Pp
.Sh "Output Window"
The output window is selected by using one of the function keys listed
below:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".It Bq F3 Teleprinter" -compact
.It Bo F1 Bc Punch 1
Display the output of Punch 1 using Elliott to UTF-8 conversion.
.Pp
.It [F2] Punch 1
Display the output of Punch 2 using Elliott to UTF-8 conversion.
.Pp
.It [F3] Teleprinter
Display the output of the teleprinter Elliott to UTF-8 conversion.
.Pp
.It [F4] Console
Display the results of console commands.
.Pp
.Sh "Console Commands"
The following commands can be typed in the console window.  Output is
only visible if the Console Window
.Bq F4
is selected.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".It list Bq ADDR Bq COUNT" -compact
.It help
.It Pq ?
Display the list of console commands.
.Pp
.It exit
.It Pq x
Exit emulation.
.Pp
.It list Bq ADDR Bq COUNT
.It Pq l
Display
.Dq COUNT
memory words starting at
.Dq ADDR
.Pp
.It mw ADDR CODE|±DEC
Write memory word to
.Dq ADDR
.Pp
.It reset
Reset all registers and stop execution.
.Pp
.It reset run
Reset all registers and restart from location zero.
.Pp
.It run Bq ADDR
start running from
.Dq ADDR
or continue after a stop.
.Pp
.It stop
Stop execution.
.Pp
.It regs
.It Pq r
Display registers and and current execution status.
.Pp
.It hello Bq ADDR Bq 1|2|3
Load a simple hello world machine code program
.Bq 4096 1
.Pp
.It reader 1|2 Bo MODE Bc FILE
Attach an existing file to a reader. Default mode is
.Em hex5 .
.Pp
.It punch 1|2 Bo MODE Bc FILE
Create a new file and attach to a punch. Default mode is
.Em hex5 .
.Pp
.It wg Bq msb|o2l|lsb|CODE|±N
Set or display word generator.
.Pp
.It wait N
Wait up to N seconds or for either a stop condition or for word generator
polling.
.Pp
.It screen 1|2|3|4
Switch screen (as F1…F4) for use in scripts
.Pp
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev E803_TAPE_DIR"
.It Ev E803_TAPE_DIR
A colon separated string of directories that are searches for tape files for the
.Dq reader
command.
.It Ev LANG
The locale to use when for curses output must be set to UTF-8
to support the wide characters used in this program.
See
.Xr environ 7
for more information.
.It Ev TERM
The terminal specified need to be one that is supported by the wide
character version of the ncurses library.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Load the internal machine code hello program:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
reset
hello
screen 1
run 4096
.Ed
.Pp
Load the demo Algol60 hello program:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
reset
reader 1 a104-tape-1.hex5
reset run
wait 5
reader 1 a104-tape-2.hex5
wg +0
wait 5
reader 1 elliott hello.a60
wg -1
wait 5
screen 3
wg +0
.Ed
.Pp
Load the demo H-Code hello program:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
reset
reader 1 h-code-compiler.hex5
reset run
wait 5
reader 1 elliott hello.hc
run 512
wait 5
screen 1
run 513
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ncurses 3 ,
.Xr environ 7
." .Sh HISTORY
." .Pp
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Christopher Hall hsw@ms2.hinet.net
.Sh BUGS
Function 56
.Dq Divide A/AR by N
is not fully tested and its overflow conditions is not likely to be
correct.  Currently it will only overflow on division by zero.
.Pp
The plotter is not implemented.
.Pp
The Film Handlers are not implemented.
.Pp
The teleprinter input is not implemented.
